Textbook of English for Grade 8
POORVI
POORVIFirst Edition
May 2025   Vaishakha 1947
PD 1500T SM
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2025
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise
disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of
binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on
this page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or
by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor
Bijnan Sutar
Chief Production
Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)
Chief Business
Amitabh Kumar
Manager
Editor
Shilpa Mohan
Production Officer
Deepak Jaiswal
Cover and Layout
Blue Fish Designs Pvt. Ltd.
Illustrations
Achin Jain c/o Green Tree Designing Studio Pvt. Ltd.
Fajruddin c/o Junaid Digital Arts
Santosh Mishra c/o Aimarts
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
0873 – POORVI
Textbook of English for Grade 8
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo
Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and printed at
SRG Traders Pvt. Ltd., B-41, Sector-67,FOREWORD
The National Education Policy 2020 envisages a system of education in the
country that is rooted in Indian ethos and its civilisational accomplishments
in all domains of human endeavour and knowledge, while at the same time
preparing students to constructively engage with the prospects and challenges
of the twenty-first century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been
well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School Education
(NCF-SE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. Having nurtured students’
inherent abilities, touching upon all the five planes of human existence, the
pañchakośas in the Foundational and the Preparatory Stages have paved the
way for the progression of their learning further at the Middle Stage. Thus,
the Middle Stage acts as a bridge between the Preparatory and the Secondary
Stages, spanning three years from Grade 6 to Grade 8.
The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with the skills
that are needed to grow as they advance in lives. It endeavours to enhance
their analytical, descriptive, and narrative capabilities, and to prepare them
for the challenges and opportunities that await them. A diverse curriculum,
covering nine subjects in three languages—including at least two languages
native to India—Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, Art Education,
Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational Education promotes
their holistic development.
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential conditions.
One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different curricular areas
as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating between content
and pedagogy—a role that will strike a judicious balance between direct
instruction and opportunities for exploration and inquiry. Among the other
conditions, classroom arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to
establish conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on its part, is
committed to providing students with such high-quality textbooks. Various
Curricular Area Groups, which have been constituted for this purpose,
comprising notable subject-experts, pedagogues, and practising teachers as
their members, have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks.
Poorvi, the English language textbook for Grade 8 is one of these. Its content
comprises stories, poems, and narratives that ensure a reflection of their
social, cultural, and geographical landscapes wherein students are sure to
find traces of their lived experiences.iv
Poorvi also weaves into its contents snippets from the vast treasure-trove
of Indian Knowledge Systems, India’s artistic and cultural heritage, and
embeds values alongside ecological sensitivity, gender equality, digital
skills, etc. For all practical purposes, it has, to my mind, succeeded in its
Curricular Goals: first, to foster natural curiosity among students through
a proper selection of content, and second, develop among them the core
competencies in listening, speaking, reading, and writing by intelligently
designing various activities around them, thereby seamlessly integrating
vocabulary and grammar within meaningful contexts.
However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should also be
encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries
play a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of
parents and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging
students to do so.
With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in the
development of this textbook, and hope that it will meet the expectations
of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions and feedback
from all its users for further improvement in the coming years.
Dinesh Prasad Saklani
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
Research and TrainingPoorvi, textbook of English for Grade 8, has been developed in alignment with the
vision of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National Curriculum
Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) 2023. Language education is essential
for effective communication, aesthetic expression, and appreciation. Reasoning
and critical thinking are closely linked with language use, and these are valuable
capacities to be developed. Language development plays an important role in
the development of perceptual and practical concepts, and also enables us to
check our experiences with others to ensure that we have a shared meaning
emerging from these experiences. The textual material developed for the
Middle Stage will take children well beyond the Preparatory Stage.
Curricular Goals, competencies, and learning outcomes have been the guiding
principles in developing the textbook. The Curricular Goals (CG) cover a range
of competencies. The NCF-SE 2023 has stated the following Curricular Goals:
CG-1: Develops independent reading, comprehension, and summarising
skills of a variety of texts (stories, poems, extracts of plays, essays,
articles, and news reports).
CG-2: Attains the ability to write about thoughts, feelings, and experiences
of social events.
CG-3: Develops the capacity for effective communication using language
skills for questioning, describing, analysing, and responding.
CG-4: Explores different literary devices and forms of literature.
CG-5: Develops the ability to recognise basic linguistic aspects (word and
sentence structure) and use them in oral and written expression.
CG-6: Develops an appreciation of the distinctive features of the language,
including its alphabet and script, sounds, rhymes, puns, and other
wordplays and games unique to the language (pp. 245–246).
The Curricular Goals have been covered through a variety of themes and
an array of activities. There are five thematic units that comprise stories,
poems, conversations, and narrative and descriptive pieces. Themes, such as
wit and wisdom, values and dispositions, mystery and magic, environment,
and science and curiosity have been included. Cross-cutting themes, such
as Indian Knowledge Systems, values, heritage, gender sensitivity, and
inclusion have been integrated into all the units. Each unit has three literary
pieces―story, poem, and conversation, or non-fictional writing. There
are in-text questions, ‘Let us discuss’ to assess comprehension of the text.
The end-of-the-text questions given in ‘Let us think and reflect’ are designed
to encourage critical thinking, reasoning, responding, analysing, and more.
ABOUT THE BOOKvi
Unit 1—‘Wit and Wisdom’ celebrates intelligence, humour, and critical
thinking. ‘The Wit that Won Hearts’ introduces students to the kingdom of
Krishnadeva Raya and legendary courtier Tenali Rama known for his wit and
problem-solving skills. The poem, ‘A Concrete Example’ by Reginald Arkell
highlights irony and satire in everyday situations. A rock garden may be a
thing of beauty for someone, and it may not catch the attention of someone
else. The play, ‘Wisdom Paves the Way’ presents a thought-provoking scenario
where different perspectives lead to unique solutions. It appreciates the role
of wisdom, reasoning, and critical thinking in resolving conflicts.
Unit 2—‘Values and Dispositions’ emphasises that true strength lies in
courage, kindness, and responsibility. ‘A Tale of Valour: Major Somnath
Sharma and The Battle of Badgam’ teaches students the values of courage,
duty, and patriotism, showing how selflessness and commitment to one’s
country can make a lasting impact. The poem, ‘Somebody’s Mother’ by Mary
Dow Brine, focuses on values of kindness, empathy, and the importance of
helping others. It teaches that small acts of kindness can bring great comfort
to those in need. ‘Verghese Kurien – I Too Had a Dream’ encourages young
people to not only pursue personal success but also contribute to the greater
good of the society, reinforcing the value of serving one’s community with
honesty and perseverance.
Unit 3—‘Mystery and Magic’ highlights the power of intelligence,
the wonders of creativity and the breathtaking marvels of nature.
‘The Case of the Fifth Word’ by Donald J. Sobol emphasises that keen attention
to detail and critical thinking can help uncover hidden truths and solve
mysteries. The poem, ‘The Magic Brush of Dreams’, revolves around creativity,
kindness, and the power of art. The poem teaches that talent should be used
for good, emphasising generosity and the impact of imagination in shaping
the world. ‘Spectacular Wonders’, explores India’s unique and mysterious
natural wonders, highlighting the enigmatic charm that each place unfolds.
Unit 4—‘Environment’ encourages students to nurture a bond with nature
and express gratitude for the bountiful gifts it offers. ‘The Cherry Tree’ by
Ruskin Bond is a story that emphasises the importance of nurturing and the
rewards of perseverance. It also teaches us to appreciate the small miracles
of life and value our deep connection with nature. The poem, ‘Harvest Hymn’
by Sarojini Naidu, reflects the hardwork of farmers and their deep faith in
the land and the divine forces. It signifies the harmony between humans
and nature, portraying the harvest as a sacred and joyous occasion. ‘Waiting
for the Rain’, by Kamakshi Balasubramanian, is a story that captures the
vagaries of nature, and its impact on farming. It also highlights the wisdom
in understanding the natural cycle of renewal and balance.vii
Unit 5—‘Science and Curiosity’ sparks curiosity about the wonders of science,
technology, and discovery. ‘Feathered Friend’ by Arthur C. Clarke explores
companionship beyond human relationships through the story of a bird
in space. The poem, ‘Magnifying Glass’ by Walter de la Mare, encourages
students to explore perception and mystery. ‘Bibha Chowdhuri: The Beam
of Light that Lit the Path for Women in Indian Science’ highlights renowned
scientists and their contributions, promoting discussions on scientific
advancements.
These literary pieces serve not only as sources of entertainment but also
as repositories of valuable life lessons, fostering personal growth, and
equipping children with skills to navigate social situations with confidence.
By resonating with children’s daily experiences, the selected pieces promote
positive values such as resilience, empathy, and emotional intelligence,
thereby exerting a profound impact on their overall development.
The primary focus lies in cultivating competencies in listening, speaking,
reading, and writing while concurrently developing vocabulary and
grammar in context. Language learning truly comes to life when connected
to the immediate environment of learners, allowing them to express their
thoughts, feelings, and experiences through experiential learning. All
the activities are conveniently colour coded under headings, such as ‘Let
us discuss’, ‘Let us think and reflect’, ‘Let us learn’, ‘Let us listen’, ‘Let us
speak’, ‘Let us write’, and ‘Let us explore’. ‘Let us Explore’ extends learning
beyond the text, staying within the unit’s theme. It aims to connect students
with the Indian Knowledge System, fostering an appreciation for our rich
heritage and culture, encouraging students to delve deeper, engage in
meaningful discussions, and broaden their understanding. In-text activities
and exercises at the end of each chapter are thoughtfully designed to be
engaging, fostering joyful learning experiences while serving as tools for
assessment and learning. Illustrations have been carefully crafted to depict
the relevant context and enhance comprehension.
We sincerely hope that students will enjoy doing these activities, and develop
language competencies.
Kirti Kapur
Professor of English, and
Member-Coordinator
Department of Education in Languages,
NCERT, New DelhiNATIONAL SYLLABUS AND TEACHING
LEARNING MATERIAL COMMITTEE
(NSTC)
1. M.C. Pant, Chancellor, National Institute of Educational Planning and
Administration (NIEPA), (Chairperson)
2. Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University, (Co-Chairperson)
3. Sudha Murty, Acclaimed Writer and Educationist
4. Bibek Debroy, Chairperson, Economic Advisory Council to the
Prime Minister (EAC – PM)
5. Shekhar Mande, Former Director General, CSIR; Distinguished Professor,
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune
6. Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, Canada
7. Shankar Mahadevan, Music Maestro, Mumbai
8. U. Vimal Kumar, Director, Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy,
Bengaluru
9. Michel Danino, Visiting Professor, IIT–Gandhinagar
10. Surina Rajan, IAS (Retd.), Haryana, Former Director General, HIPA
11. Chamu Krishna Shastri, Chairperson, Bharatiya Bhasha Samiti,
Ministry of Education
12. Sanjeev
Sanyal,
Member,
Economic
Advisory
Council
to
the
Prime Minister (EAC – PM)
13. M.D. Srinivas, Chairperson, Centre for Policy Studies, Chennai
14. Gajanan Londhe, Head, Programme Office
15. Rabin Chhetri, Director, SCERT, Sikkim
16. Pratyusha Kumar Mandal, Professor, Department of Education in
Social Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi
17. Dinesh Kumar, Professor, Department of Education in Science and
Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi
18. Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
19. Ranjana Arora, Professor and Head, Department of Curriculum Studies
and Development, NCERT (Member-Secretary)Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national
struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst
all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional
or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity
of women;
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reform;
to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education
to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution (42nd
Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
Part IV A (Article 51 A)CONTRIBUTORS
N. Nagaraju, Professor and Vice Chancellor, English and Foreign Languages,
University, Hyderabad (Team Leader)
Anju Gandhi, Academic Consultant, Sri Sri Ravi Shankar Vidya Mandir Trust,
Bengaluru
Girish Nair, Senior Member, Samvit Research Foundation, Bengaluru
Nidhi Tiwari, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
Rachana Chattopadhyay, PGT English, Cambridge School Srinivaspuri,
New Delhi
Ruchi Sengar, CBSE Subject Expert; ELT Consultant, New Delhi
Saket Bahuguna, Assistant Professor, Central Institute of Hindi-Delhi Centre,
New Delhi
Sasi Raj, PGT English, PM Shri Kendriya Vidyalaya, DIAT, Pune
Suganya J., Head of Department, English, Bala Vidya Mandir Senior Secondary
School, Adyar, Chennai
Sushmita Roy Choudhury, Dean Academics, G. D. Goenka Public School, Jammu
Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi (Member-Coordinator)
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT TEAMConstitution of india
Part iii (articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in
educational institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson and
members of the National Curriculum Framework Oversight Committee
for their invaluable contributions in overseeing the translation of
NCF-SE 2023 perspectives into the textbook. NCERT is also deeply grateful to
the Chairperson, Co-Chairperson, and Members of the National Syllabus and
Teaching-Learning Material Development Committee for their continuous
guidance and thorough review of the textbook. Furthermore, NCERT extends
its heartfelt thanks to the Chairpersons and members of the Sub-Group:
English of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Languages, as well as other
relevant CAGs, for their support and guidelines on the cross-cutting themes.
The Council is grateful for granting permission to reproduce copyright material
in this book and would like to thank Ruskin Bond for ‘The Cherry Tree’;
and Kamakshi Balasubramanian for the story ‘Waiting for the Rain’ published
by The National Book Trust; and Nirmala Kurien and Siddharth Sheth for
‘Verghese Kurien—I Too Had A Dream’ by Verghese Kurien, a letter to his
grandson.
We also acknowledge the following: Sarojini Naidu for ‘Harvest Hymn’ from
The Golden Threshold; Mary Dow Brine for ‘Somebody’s Mother’; Arthur C.
Clarke for ‘Feathered Friend’; Donald J. Sobol for ‘The Case of the Fifth Word’
(adapted); Walter de la Mare for ‘Magnifying Glass’; and Reginald Arkell for
‘A Concrete Example’.
The Council acknowledges the support of Amarendra Behera, Professor and
Joint Director, CIET; Pratyusha Kumar Mandal, Professor and Head, DESS;
Sunita Farakya, Professor and Head, DESM; Indrani Bhaduri, Professor and
Head, ESD; Vinay Singh, Professor and Head, DEGSN; Milli Roy, Professor
and Head, DGS; and Jyotsna Tiwari, Professor and Head, DEAA, along with
their teams, for their meticulous efforts in ensuring the seamless integration
of cross-curricular aspects throughout the textbook and linkages with other
curricular areas. Our special thanks to Ministry of Defence (MoD) for their
support and guidance for the chapter on Major Somnath Sharma, PVC. We
thank Gauri Srivastava, Professor, DESS for coordinating with the MoD. We
also thank Kirti Kapur, Professor, DEL for developing the content of this
chapter.
We are also grateful to Md. Faruq Ansari, Professor and Head, DEL, for
providing academic and administrative support.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSxiv
The Council acknowledges and appreciates the contributions made by
Monika Dohare, Senior Research Assistant; Asma Rafiq, Deepa Dubey, Faizy
Abdul Kalam, Abhishek Kumar, and Alisha Mural, Junior Project Fellows; and
Himani, Graphic Designer (Contractual) from the Department of Education in
Languages, NCERT for providing support in the development of the textbook.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication Division, NCERT for
their
support.
NCERT
gratefully
acknowledges
the
contributions
made by Pawan Kumar Barriar, Incharge, DTP Cell; Mohammad Wasi
and Manoj
Kumar, DTP
Operators (Contractual); Kanchan Mishra,
Ambuj Mishra, Keshav Kumar, and Rajat Subhra Roy, Proofreaders
(Contractual); and Shadab Khan, Computer Typist (Contractual).
Copyright has been applied for all the texts and the publisher extends
apologies for any omissions and would be glad to hear from any such
unacknowledged copyright holders.
Poorvi
The textbook of English for Grade 8 is titled Poorvi after the
Indian rāga ‘Poorvi’. This rāga is said to promote harmony
and serenity. It is associated with dusk, specifically sunset
time (Sandhi Prakash). Each rāga in Indian music carries its
own emotional significance and is symbolically connected
to certain seasons, times of day, and moods. Rāgas are
believed to evoke specific emotions in listeners.
Poorvi is an ancient and traditional Hindustani classical
rāga that originated in eastern India. It is typically performed
during the fourth prahar of the day, between 3:00 p.m. and
6:00 p.m. It evokes a sense of calmness and contemplation in
the journey of learners, symbolising a harmonious blend of
traditional and modern learning.Foreword
iii
About the Book
v
Unit 1: Wit and Wisdom
The Wit that Won Hearts
A Concrete Example
Wisdom Paves the Way
Unit 2: Values and Dispositions
A Tale of Valour: Major Somnath Sharma
and the Battle of Badgam
Somebody’s Mother
Verghese Kurien—I Too Had A Dream
Unit 3: Mystery and Magic
The Case of the Fifth Word
The Magic Brush of Dreams
Spectacular Wonders
Unit 4: Environment
The Cherry Tree
Harvest Hymn
Waiting for the Rain
Unit 5: Science and Curiosity
Feathered Friend
Magnifying Glass
Bibha Chowdhuri: The Beam of
Light that Lit the Path for Women in
Indian Science
CONTENTS
Foreword
About the Book
Unit 1: Wit and W
The Wit th
A Concret
Wisdom P
Unit 2: Values an
A Tale of V
and the B
CON